You don't know it's a science fiction here.
You're well trapped.
Because it's not packaged as science fiction, which didn't matter to me.
Deliver it.
You can tape it if you want.
Revolent time was a definite attempt between myself and the publisher.
I had the idea.
I saw the idea as being something that a non-science fiction reader would buy.
Science fiction sells 20% of all fiction in the United States in paperback, which is not
bad.
But being a writer, I see 80% more I could sell.
And publishers like to sell more too.
So we talked about the novel.
I said it's pure science fiction, but it starts out as a mystery novel.
And it's a good core of the way into it before the science fiction element is brought in.
It's a science fiction element that the reader will accept any general reader.
And by that time he's trapped.
And I think if you think you can sell as a mainstream, I will try it.
And I turned the manuscript in England and America and I said, yes, we're going to try
and sell this to everybody.
And 10, 20 years ago, I couldn't have done that because I had no big name and the readers
would not have bought it.
Now I have enough readers around.
They'll see it.
They'll see my name on it.
They'll look at it, open it, maybe buy it.
The science fiction reader is.
So I don't think we'll lose one science fiction reader by packaging it that way.
We might pick up a lot of other readers, which make me happy, my publisher happy, my wife
happy, my children, my bank manager, you know, all the things you want to make happy.
Okay.
We've talked a bit about your novels, but we haven't made short stories in Britain.
One or two of those.
How do you attack a short story as opposed to the novels that they occur to you?
In science fiction, unlike a lot of other fiction, there are people who write both short stories
and novels.
Most, some of them can, a lot of them can.
And very simply, it is least residual.
A short story is a one idea story with a single gimmick or device or turn of plot.
And you write that to length and stop it at two or three or four or five thousand words.
If it's complicated, it goes to 10,000 novelette.
As opposed to a novel, which is a complex thought that requires modifications, more
than one idea, ramifications, and then it goes to novel length.
And many times I first started writing, I had short story ideas, and they're very good
to do.
They go in the magazines, they go in anthologies, read, recognize your name.
And deliberately between novels would do a half dozen short stories.
Unhappily, after a number of years of writing, you find publishers want to give you more
money for novels.
And they really do.
The word rate per word in a novel is about ten times the short story.
And I find myself telling to cook one novel at the end of the other.
I've written a short story in three or four or five years, which I think is a shame because
I have four collections of short stories out all selling quite nicely.
And they've been apologizing about 22 languages.
But in the history of time, I found a time in life I wanted to anthologize and I did.
A time in life I wanted to write short stories I did.
Now I'm trying to write longer and longer books like Rebels in Time, the current book,
which will be about a quarter of a million words, at least perhaps longer.
Not because I want to write a long book, because a very complex idea requires that amount of
time to work out.
And there again, it's writers' lives go in the waves like the ocean.
You search up the beach, a lot of dead things in it, and go away out to the ocean again
in clear depths.
You produce different things at different times.
If you could write anything you want, not worrying about economic exigences, would
you stick to short stories or would they mean that much to you?
I'm happy to say that for the last 20-odd years, I've never written a thing I didn't
want to write.
I've turned down assignments I didn't enjoy and I've written just exactly the book in
short stories I wanted to write.
It's a nice position to be in, Tim.
I read the books that you've signed so far, the collections.
I think I have all the collections.
So I read all those short stories plus summits and apologies.
And rescue operation far and away was my favorite.
That's unusual here.
Yes, the rescue operation.
There again, I see one idea.
That rescue operation came out.
Everything in there, I know, except the alien.
In Yugoslavia, the most broken down country in Western Europe, they have peasants there
which are much more broken down than German peasants.
They have deeply religious, civil-mindedly stupid people burning peasants within 10 miles
of a nuclear reactor.
The perfect analog of our world.
Instead of northern civilized countries, southern poor, uncivilized countries, all in one country.
And having been in the middle of this and having had a number of desperately awful things
happen to me and my family down there, the children got scarlet fever, had injections
with blunt needles, had a carium screaming, you know, sort of thing.
And I got living in that desperate, awful world.
And there again, the background was there.
And then the thought, instead of arriving in Central Park in front of the White House,
what if the alien from space arrived there?
Voila, you know, complete.
Just a matter of writing it.
I was also very moved by the one...
I'm terrible at names and titles.
The one where you said you got the idea when you were in Europe, or wherever you are,
you heard that Martin Luther King had been shot, so basically he was just turned over.
That's right.
Not me, not Amos Cabot.
No, that's not what they would say.
I'll come again.
That's not a short story.
Yeah, Mute Milton, Mute Milton.
Mute Milton.
Yeah, living in Scandinavia, but now this dates two or three or four years, and the
Danes are absolutely colorblind.
That in fact, in those days, really certain kind of girls only date black men.
They all they go, they just look down upon them.
There were about four black men in the whole country, you know.
And you know, you just have to say, it's very easy to be pro-race, anti-race away
if you're in a country with no race problems.
But I mean, living there, the children growing up there, and Martin Luther King
was shot and a newspaper called me, asked me what my opinion on it, you know,
and they were all horrified.
And then I pick a copy of Newsweek up and they had some great big belly
Alabama, a photograph of him with a shotgun one hand, a nose picker in the other.
And his belly hangover is his belt, you know, saying, well, just one more
nigga to me.
And I just, my white heat enculfed my mind.
One of America's, he got a Nobel Prize earlier than that.
You know, one of America's, well, I was very proud he came over there.
Then Scandinavia, hit an American getting a prize for doing something really
good in the world, being honored for it.
And I saw red and the idea came to me, you know, the story just began
to put into a story that, that rage I had, that strong feeling.
And if I write, I can do that.
Well, then you're successful story.
The thing that came to mind, you were, you described the device that he had
had concocted and there's a lot of detail in that.
Reminds me of other in your own knowledge.
You have a lot of engineering and physics and mechanics and that sort of thing.
That's not in your background per se, but you must have an interest in it to put it.
Yeah.
Well, my background superficially looks like it's all in the arts.
But in reality, my early training was as a mechanic and a computer engineer
began all in the military for some reason, best known to myself.
I have a very high mechanical aptitude.
The army had a test for this and the maximum 160, I did 156.
So they ramble, they threw me into a school, the northern bombsite, the old
northern bombsite, the mystery of the war.
And it works on that and the computing gun sites right next to it.
And I could do it and I enjoyed it.
And I spent the whole war working on these things and driving a truck
and teach people to shoot, you know.
And so my background is there is in mechanics.
I know this is a mechanics.
And I did major in biology in school before I went in.
And I keep my reading up.
That's all.
I mean, a science fiction writer shouldn't be a jackdaw of science.
You should know enough about any science to read an article on it and know what
they're talking about, what I do.
The nice part is among science fiction readers, there's so many closet
readers who have other jobs.
Every engineer in the world, in every school, you see to be a science fiction
fan, professors of this biology linguistics, and they love this stuff.
And I have a problem.
I just grabbed some professor, a doctor teaching physics, said, tell me about
that, they'll sit down because you know yourself, any engineer, all he wants to
was talk about a speciality over and over and over again.
I love to hear about it.
And I pinned these guys down.
I know enough about the basics of mechanics and biology.
And that's your favorite.
Understand they're talking about.
And for a while, I'm an authority on it.
I did Skyfall.
I had a science fiction fan in England who's an upper atmosphere specialist
in about three in the world at the time.
A typical British program, sending British packages up in American rockets
from Norway, you know, into the upper atmosphere.
And for one while there, I had charts.
I understood all about orbital mechanics.
I know everything about it for one glorious month or two.
I did that chapter.
It's all gone now.
And again, to answer the question, I know the areas I don't know.
I know enough to ask somebody and not get it right and have them check it out.
But you really should do your sums and science fiction, get your facts right
and then work around that known facts should be right and make up your own
facts afterwards.
Skyfall was almost prophetic, wasn't it?
Not almost.
Skyfall was prophetic.
Yeah, now twice.
The skyfall was prophetic in the sense that there again, from the literature
I discovered that the Russians and the Americans were lying to the world.
These great big boosters did not burn upon reentry.
They just flashed down the ocean.
And what they were doing was relying upon the law of averages.
Three quarters of the world was water, right?
Ninety eight percent of the land is desert or mountain, right?
So the chances are you're never going to drop on somebody.
Oh, yeah, I said.
So this friend, the rocket program showed me.
Radio Sun Rocket, they sent up with, you know, an instrumentation in the nose.
Was it too important things up our atmosphere and had failed.
Went 150 miles, turned over under full blast and blasted down at full speed
into the ground.
That's it all is still working, you know.
So no, they don't burn up the atmosphere.
And I said, one of these days, they're going to drop one of these things
in the wrong place and they're big.
They weigh tons and tons and tons and we're being lied to.
So then again, that's a plot.
And I worked on a plot where you drop it on something big.
And, you know, a little bit later.
And the interesting part was doubly prophetic in that.
At this point, we didn't know the upper atmosphere very much.
And Professor Webb was telling me that he said, gee, you know,
just discovered the upper atmosphere is so tenuous that when a photon storm,
the solar flare large when hits the upper atmosphere, it can move up a
matter of 50, 80 miles, a matter of minutes.
Because as a heat interstate molecule, they expand up, it goes.
And wow, I said plot device.
I needed a way of stopping my orbiting ship to get it down in one spot.
Solar storm, it goes around the back of the earth, comes out like hitting a
wall and falls. Guess why Skylab came down.
They put Skylab in orbit.
They did not know this happened.
It came down for just that reason.
And I put this guy's mind.
That's fun to do. Let me tell you.
I'll ask you two more questions in one of them.
It just occurred to me.
What what what's it like?
Raise a family, marry a family, be a science fiction writer.
What what does your wife and family have to put up with?
Well, you really should ask my wife.
We should ask my wife.
It's never boring.
All right.
Um, it.
Writers are a pretty dim lot to begin with.
They and I know a lot of them.
They're people ears that can tanker us.
What they do, they really want to write into nothing else.
And women don't really like them.
They they change a lot of ways.
Not because the women can't put up with nonsense.
And the ones that stay married because they marry a woman who is nice enough or
smart enough or.
Komodi is enough to entertain their style of life
and to permit them to do this sort of thing and put up with all their nonsense.
Happy to say my dear wife and I'm moving to Mexico with a one year old baby
and living in a small town with fleas and giving the kid malarish in mind,
going to Denmark or England or Italy.
And it's just the way it works.
The right is not going to change.
It's really up to the wife to put up with the nonsense.
And the kids can kids grow up in any conditions.
Kids think whatever they have is normal.
So they're not a problem at all.
As long as you think about them.
I think it took a lot of good things.
Like automatically learn to write a plan.
They put up with more than just speaking.
More than just speaking.
And they had to get back to the states because they knew they were American.
They lived it and know what it meant.
So we talked out and one decided to remain European.
The other decided to remain American and about that.
I guess I should ask why the moving around.
If that's a fair question.
I don't know what is the nickels and cyclopoeia says your parapetetic.
Yes, that's the word.
I want to edit that.
Yeah, you look it up.
Yeah. Yeah.
One editor.
We should know that's the way you increase your vocabulary.
You know, that's why I love to read Graham Green and Anthony Burgess.
You look up words and Kingsie Amos.
Kingsie Amos one book that says this is back in the 50s.
And it must have been a student back here.
He said, out in the street in New York, I saw a rather amphibianic car.
Amphibianic car.
The hell is that?
It means a creature with a face in both ends.
There are certain worms look like a face in both ends.
Amphiz physiognomy.
By any.
Oh, so great.
Now, that's how you increase your vocabulary.
But yeah, parapet, parapeteticism.
Some are born parapetetic.
Some are tame parapeteticism.
Some have a thrust upon them.
Not bad.
You can't do that every day of the week.
I think I followed all three categories.
I couldn't work in New York.
I've been in Mexico a few times, the station, the boardroom, the war.
I liked it very, very much.
I liked the whole way alive and went to Mexico and we lived there for a year
and then couldn't.
It was just too boring and too simple, nothing much going on with the family.
And then I went to England and once you start moving, you find it's much easier to keep going.
And the answer basically is like when you ask someone, someone asked me why I raise a beard.
I asked them why they shave theirs off.
And I said, why are you living in Texas?
And if you're always in Texas, but why aren't you living in England?
I mean, whenever I've seen a place I didn't want to visit.
And I find it's utterly fascinating to learn about cultures.
I think I told a number of times at different science fiction writers,
if you're writing about other cultures, shouldn't you see a little bit more than your own culture?
Should you get around?
And I find it utterly fascinating to go into a new culture,
I mean, a new kind of life to speak a new language and see how people work.
And I think it must be reflected in my work.
Well, you'd also said, honey, you couldn't write about the future without your present.
I mean, you don't get the past and you don't want to spend.
Because you're talking about the future.
It's different.
Well, you answered my question while I was going to ask you.
Your first Star Wars, the home world was in England and Star Wars was in the States.
Very, very, very definitely, very definitely playing.
You're not like champ.
I mean, obviously when you look at it, you know, but people don't really look at the
unalien. So it's accepted. It's kept the whole good stuff.
Exactly.
Okay.
At the end of the, we want to wind one up.
You want to wind another question, wind it up?
Or are we, how are we doing?
Question to wind it up.
Okay.
A real lightweight question.
How do you want to be remembered?
What are you after?
And how do you want to be remembered?
I'm at this, like John Cowley say staying alive forever.
No, no.
Uh, how do you want to be remembered?
I don't want to be remembered.
I want to be here.
That's a very simple answer.
Running is a very satisfying craft.
When you do it, you're satisfied what you're doing.
If you're doing it well, but then it's not like, I don't really believe that
real writers write in closets for them their own pleasure.
Then your, it's a communication.
It's like talking in sex.
You have it into a relationship going on all the time.
Then after having done the best of your ability, something,
you want to publish it and see if anybody knows what the hell you said.
And that's interesting.
See if you succeeded in what you were trying to do.
See as an artist, I was always doing artwork and getting it out there.
So I'm used to having a feedback public.
And then again, if you would all feel about the state of the world,
the right, it's a very privileged state, the science fiction, right?
He can give lectures and he can tell people what to do and he can
warn them, you know, in a very hectoring tone of voice.
And if you can do all those things, it's a satisfactory way of getting from
A to B, you know, a lot more satisfactory than working at McDonald's.